---
title: 'Intro to Backpacking - Part 2'
date: '2021-11-05'
author: 'Thomas'
avatar: './thomas.jpg'
blurb: 'The gear you will use is obviously important but you shouldn’t let your fears get the best of you as you pack your bag to hit the trail.'
tags: ['hiking', 'backpacking', 'how-to']
type: 'blog'
---

_Hi there! This is part 2 in a five part series welcoming new hikers to backpacking. 
Don't forget to check out <a href="/blog/intro-to-backpacking-1">part 1</a> if you 
haven't already._

## No Need to Fear the Gear

The gear you will use is obviously important but you shouldn’t let your fears get the 
best of you as you pack your bag to hit the trail. It has been said that we often pack 
our fears. This might be why I brought an 8 ounce multi tool on my first solo backpacking 
trip and not the .8 ounce mini Swiss Army knife that I also own. My fear of something 
going wrong at camp led me to pack a tool that included both a flat and Phillips head 
screwdriver, a file, can opener, and needle nose pliers that I never once used nor would 
they have been able to help me if I did have an issue. My mini flashlight was made 
redundant by my headlamp and I had a whole set of clothes that would have been better off 
in a dresser at home than weighing down my back. Don’t let your imagination get the best 
of you as you gear up for your adventure. Keep it simple!

At the same time, you may be afraid that you don’t have the proper gear for the 
experience. This is an important point because your ability to stay dry and warm will 
directly correlate with your ability to enjoy your adventure. The big, bulky sleeping bag 
you have for car camping should work just fine to get you started although you will 
likely want to make sure that the temperature rating will be sufficient for a night in 
the wild. The same goes for your tent, so long as you can fit the tent in your bag and it 
will keep you dry, you will be good to go. Weight and volume are important considerations 
when packing your backpack so the 5lb cotton lined sleeping bag that doesn’t compress any 
smaller than the size a frozen turkey and the 6 person tent you have might not be ideal 
and may not fit in your bag comfortably enough that you want to carry it 2 miles uphill 
in both directions.

Speaking of your bag, you will definitely need one big and sturdy enough to hold 
everything you’ll need. If you are unable to borrow one, look online or at your local 
sporting goods store. You’ll get what you pay for in terms of quality but in terms of 
use, an active lifestyle will always give you a reason to have a comfortable 50 or 60 
liter bag at your disposal. Other than your footwear, your bag will be the most important 
choice you make in terms of comfort and personal fit. A well fitted and padded bag can 
make or break your experience in the same ways that a pair of hiking shoes or trail 
runners can, so don’t be afraid to try on a few backpacks until you find the most 
comfortable one for your body.

At a budget clearance site like Sierra.com or a brick and mortar like Dunham’s sports you 
could cover your “Big 3” for under $350. The Big 3 being your shelter, sleeping system, 
and backpack. You’ll need a warm sleeping bag and ground pad or inflatable mat, a 
reasonably sized tent and rain fly - nothing bigger than a 2 or 3 person tent, and a bag 
to carry it all. Jungle style camping hammocks are gaining popularity and are my choice 
of shelter. However, they can be finicky and often require specific gear (underquilt, a 
larger rainfly, bug net, and rigging) that is different from a tent style shelter.

_Things to consider_: What sort of temperatures and climate should you prepare for? Do 
you toss and turn at night or are you able to sleep on your back comfortably? Will your 
backpack be as comfortable on mile 5 as it was on mile 1? Is there enough room for you 
to pack sleep clothes and food?
